Obviously, I hadn't been informed.
Well, one of my guys knew about it, but for some reason, I didn't get the word.
So I was caught completely off guard, but it was a major incident.
But it's one that should have been reported up the chain, you know, all the way, because this guy did.
He had kind of a crush on this one female cadet over there.
She was a
I want to say a sophomore and junior, but she's a rather sturdy young woman.
And he burst in the room like 2 o'clock in the morning with this rifle and a magazine over his shoulder there, I mean a magazine belt.
And so she was able to disarm the guy.
And he apparently was, you know, there to shoot her.
She was, I guess, she'd spurned his romantic efforts or something there.
But I'll make a long story to the heart.
This guy was tried and sent to jail for 30 years, I believe he was.
But a long time.
But anyway, it was an incident where the incident system, the reporting system didn't work.
But normally anything of significance, talk to John.
Now, I didn't talk to the president directly.
You know, John would then call the president if he thought so.
Now, the provost was not in this loop on all of this.
This was all through the vice president for student services.
Unless there was a cheating incident or something like that, and I remember one or two of those where I acted as a dean in that case, according to the student rules, as head of the School of Military Sciences here.
Cheating in an ROTC class.
That was one kind of unique thing that I got involved in there as head of the School of Military Sciences.
What about some, surely there must have been a few problems that in fact were humorous, goofy, silly.
Oh.
Here are some of those.
Well, you know, in hindsight some of them are silly.
At the time I wasn't so sure.
My first, well,
I can cite two or three things here.
Hopefully I won't get too carried away here and make them so drawn out.
But my first year here, it was before the Texas game.
It was about the 15th of November.
I get this report when I come to work in the morning that the Austin police
They've just released some cadets over in Austin.
They'd found these cadets, they found this one cadet who was tied up in shorts and shivering and been raining.
It was chained to a wood fence or something near the tower there on the University of Texas campus.
Looked like a hazing incident in that they were releasing him to A&M to take care of.
Well, this was the classic haul-off that I didn't know anything about.
Nobody briefed me on haul-offs, my first experience.
And it was, I just reviewed that story this morning in my files, but this kid, it's common practice for commanding officers to get hauled off.
They, this week before the Texas game, when everything, or a week or two, when the intensity's running high there and hype, they grab their, the freshman grab their CO when he's least suspecting it and they'll blindfold him and tie him up and take him out somewhere and drop him off and he has to find his way back.
That kind of thing is what it's all about.
This particular one, they,
It put this guy through all kind of ordeal.
They stripped him down and shaved him and put heel and sole on him and put him in a sleeping bag except his head, put him in the back of a pickup and drove him to Austin.
He didn't know where he was going or anything.
He was blindfolded and gagged.
And he ends up over there and they tie him up to this...
post or whatever it is there and drop his pants and initial his rear end and make pictures of all this and and then wave him goodbye well just at the end of this a police officer happens to notice all this and observe what's going on and you know he confronts them and they say oh it's tradition well
Anyway, they get arrested, and we have a big investigation going.
It makes the news, makes the newspaper.
This A&M student arrested over here for all this.
What happened to them?
Well, the one cadet was suspended from school.
As I recall, he was suspended.
That's one I had to go over and brief the regents on.
They wanted to know about this one.
But, you know, they didn't give me any advice or anything.
Now, when you were an undergraduate here, were there haul-offs of COs then?
Not that I remember.
That's what I thought.
This was all a new thing.
They stole your footlocker and put it on the field, maybe at the game.
But I never heard of haul-offs.
But haul-offs, I found out, were a pretty common thing.
And, you know, some people said this is hazing.
Well, that's a...
That's one that's pretty hard to sort out because the CO, the senior, he didn't really object to it.
He could have said stop and they would have stopped.
But he let them do this because this is a good bull thing.
It's fun.
It draws the CO and the freshman close together.
And I've heard them go through all the arguments that, you know, the good things that come from this.
And there is a lot of fun and all in these kind of things, but they get carried away and the students don't realize the danger in this.
I remember another haul off, happened a different year, but this, these freshmen took or captured their CO.
They took him out here to Coulter Field.
They'd arranged for an airplane to be there, a little small airplane.
They blindfolded him, all that, put him on this airplane, and flew him to Fort Stockton, Texas.
Landed at the airport there, let him off, and he's got a, you know, really doesn't even know where he is when he gets there.
And, you know, he's on his own to get back.
They'd fly on back on the airplane.
I guess they'd arrange to take them out there.
Now those are good examples.
One other good one.
I get this story one morning that there's been another haul-off.
The freshman captures four or five of them.
Captured their CO in the evening and they'd...
gone to Dallas and they had breakfast at one of the cadets' parents' home.
They had breakfast and their intent was to go to Mount Rushmore in South Dakota and to photograph themselves with this senior, their CO there at Mount Rushmore.
Well, you know, he's tied down.
He's under control there.
I don't know.
It may have been blindfolded, gagged some.
That was a typical thing they did.
But they were headed on to Mount Rushmore.
We knew that they were en route.
Well, they got to Wichita, Kansas, I believe it was.
And they had to stop the restroom.
They stopped at some roadside park, as I recall.
And while they were there, a policeman or a highway patrol stopped by and came wandering by there slowly or something.
I don't remember exactly how it was.
But anyway, as I recall, this senior decided he would make a break for it.
and get away from them.
And the police got, you know, questioned what's this all about and find out what's going on, and there they are, caught.
And no money or anything.
The kid calls home.
He lived in San Antonio, the senior, and his parents got a bus ticket, I believe it was, for him to get on back home.
These freshmen, they decided since they're already that far, they'll just go on to Mount Rushmore.
And one of them lived in South Dakota, I believe.
So they did.
They went on to Mount Rushmore.
But again, a case where, you know, there's lots of danger involved.
The one with the airplane, for example, or tying some up blindfolded in the back of a pickup.
You know, what if you had an accident?
Just think of the
Right, any sad, sad incidents that you remember during those things?
Or someone was hurt or... I can't, I can't...
personally recall a haul-off where there was an injury like that or I say an injury where there was a major injury I can't I can't recall one I can think of some other times when things court trips where we had accidents but not under those circumstances let's go through a typical
academic year, when did the routine for you really begin before the fall semester as the Commandant?
When did things get into high gear?
Well, it started with the new student conferences.
We were very involved with those all summer long.
I used to sit through every one of those.
We'd have an hour and a half for the core presentation.
I've sat through so many of those, I couldn't tell you how many.
Of course, Don Johnson's been doing it a lot longer than I have, but anyway, I'd sit through those.
I enjoyed those and interacting with the parents, and it was always the same questions generally that you would get.
Parents were concerned about how's my son or daughter going to be treated.
You know, what's this hazing stuff?
Is that so?
Is that really hazing?
And what do they need to bring and all that stuff?
But those were good times.
I enjoyed the new student conferences and it was a very positive thing.
And then the first big event was Freshman Orientation Week, FOW we called it.
When I came here, they told me that had been implemented a few years before and it was a period to really get the freshmen ready, teach them how to wear the uniform, get their rooms organized, walk them around, show them all their classrooms where they're
classmates, all of these things, they'd have squared away, do this for a week, so the first day of classes, man, they're going to be there on time and in their seat.
That was the idea, the preparation, sort of low-key, I was told.
I later learned that it wasn't as low-key as I thought it ought to be.
That was what freshman orientation, but a very intense time when parents are bringing their students and dropping them off and saying goodbye.
I've watched all of that up close and seen how that affects families.
And what about fish camp?
Fish camp, we didn't really have much to do with that and didn't have anything directly to do with it.
Oh, okay.
But most of our fish cadets did go to fish camp.
They liked the camp.
I found since I first came here that fish camp is a very popular thing with the students.
It does teach them a lot about being Aggies and they get into the spirit.
And when they come back from fish camp, they all say, howdy.
And it's amazing what they're able to teach them in that short period of time and how indoctrinated the new students become in that short period.
But our cadets, most of them went to the fish camp.
Then when the first...
two or three days after Freshman Orientation Week, then when classes begin, what were the realities that you had to be concerned about?
Retention.
We even became concerned about that during FOW.
Some would quit and then.
I saw one kid that quit within two hours after he signed up on Sunday afternoon.
I don't know the whole story there, but we'd have a few that would quit during freshman orientation week, just decide that, you know, this is not what I thought it was.
I don't like all this togetherness and people telling me what to do and controlling my schedule.
But I'd say retention was much on our minds.
from the very first day of school because it was a big adjustment and we knew and it still happens there's a fair number that will resign from the Corps.
When were the other most likely Corps dropout times?
Well it started it usually
declined over a fairly well the dropout rate was fairly significant the first five six weeks and then it sort of flattened out but there's a period oh I'd say late in the semester and then before the next semester begins you notice some will drop out then
But, you know, to get through the freshman year, the retention rate is very good.
All right.
Then I guess one of the next times is the first home football game.
I mean the next time of big events for you all.
What was the commandant's routine for a home football game?
Leave out the Texas game.
Well, I remember a lot of parents and visitors rolling in on Friday afternoon.
Some would come by the office to say hello.
And where was your office?
Over there in the Trigon, right there across from... Where it's always been?
Where it's always been, just east of Rudder, but it was a...
Very common to see people stop by to say hello and a lot of parents wanting to see their students, especially freshman parents.
But then Friday night, all the hype about Yale practice.
Saturday morning, the students are usually out there practicing their marching and all.
They're getting ready for this big thing called the March Inn, which is a big event for the Corps.
They like that.
And the parents love it.
But it consumes a lot of time getting ready for that.
You know, the Corps step off from the quad, we call it, when they leave the quad to head toward the stadium.
And I forget, it's two and a half hours or something like that before kickoff.
So they're in formation all a good while.
And then that marching into the stadium around the track by the review stand is a very special event.
for new cadets and for older ones as well, but especially for the new ones.
And the parents there, I've stood there on that reviewing stand and watched that and I see these parents behind me and all and you just see the pride and admiration and their interest in spotting their student and it kind of sends chills down your spine just standing there observing and being a part of it.
It always did affect me that way.
A very
moving time, but very positive time.
During all of those ten years of your being Commandant, who were some of the celebrities you remember being in the reviewing stand at a Corps march in?
Well, President Bush, George W. Bush, been there several times.
George W.?
George W. has been there, not as President.
As Governor.
He was there on more than one occasion.
It seemed like every year we had President Bush at least once come out there.
That was always a real treat for the crowd.
Did he seem to enjoy it?
Oh, he enjoyed it, and he seemed to mix very well.
Mm-hmm.
Students would run a clerk around the track to come over there to get him to sign an autograph.
They'd start that and then others would come and it was interesting to watch.
But he tried to be responsive to as many people as possible and pose for pictures.
People would want to get their picture with him.
But he was the one that really stands out.
Let's see, Clinton didn't.
No.
Governors?
I'd be dumbfounded if you said Ann Richards was there and enjoyed it.
No, but Ann Richards did visit us one time, not on the weekend, but that was a very interesting event too.
I'd like to talk about that if we get a chance.
Let me just mention Rick Perry has been there, not as governor, but he's been there before.
But people like that, and then we've had military leaders, four-star kind of people.
We've had several of those.
Any international figures?
military leaders from other nations?
We've had some foreign people there before, not leaders of nations, but some foreign military representatives have been there.
And I presume no goof-ups, no gaffs, no accidents?
I don't recall anything on review except one thing, it was just before the review is my second year here,
uh we'd gone through the president we'd gone through the president's buffet that was another thing that we do on uh march in day is a football game day we go to the president i say we several of us and a lot of visiting dignitaries go to the president's buffet and then we go to the track and watch the review usually the president
Most of them have been very faithful about coming out there and standing there.
And from one to three regents usually come and stand there.
Some of them very faithful about doing that.
Sometimes even more.
And other people.
But they would come do that.
But the second year I was here, we had finished the President's Buffet.
We'd all walked over to the stadium.
And as I was walking up to the track, someone came...
running up to me to say, are you aware of the big accident that just happened?
And I said, what are you talking about?
And they said, well, the Parsons Cavalry horses just ran over these people over there and some were seriously injured and they're en route to the hospital.
This was all news to me.
But this was as the Corps, prior to their leaving the quadrangle, they fired the cannon over there and they had these horses with the caisson
behind it for a team of four horses i believe it was pulling this caisson well these horses bolted when they fired the cannon and they took off running they had a couple of handlers on the ground but they lost control two riders on these horses and these horses bolted out the quadrangle and all these people standing around and right over there on the corner of joe rout and
Rock Martin, I guess it is.
There was a little island there, and this older couple was among the people in there, and this caisson horses ran over these people.
And they told me they were en route to the hospital and looked very critical, serious, they thought.
Well, I immediately left and went to the hospital, medical center.
And I spent pretty much the rest of the afternoon at the hospital.
These people were in critical condition.
I believe it was the lady had to have brain surgery that evening.
And we were so afraid that we were going to lose these people.
And they were parents of an Aggie, not a current student, but they were Aggies, the people in their 70s, I believe.
But anyway, they survived this thing, and we thought we had a...
big suit or something on her hands.
But it ended up, the insurance covered their expenses and that was pretty much the end of it.
But these people were as battered as I've ever seen, totally blue and purple all over from the bruises on their bodies.
But that one really ruined my Saturday and several days.
All right, then at the game, where normally did the commandant and his wife sit?
We would sit in the regent's box.
When I came here, they told me that we normally have eight tickets.
You and your wife, the visiting, reviewing officer and his wife, and then that's four, I guess it's ten.
Then the three...
colonels one from each of the services the PNS the PAS PMS and their wives so there was a block of 10 tickets I guess it was that we normally had in that box and that's the way it was for the first few years but then things changed and it became as I understood it the regents box now maybe it always had been but control shifted a little bit
But it is known today, I believe, as the regents box and the regents control that box.
But it seemed to me that it was mostly current regents and their families plus some older farmer regents
or just former Regents and their wives and families and special guests like that.
But we did have that group of seats in there that was a nice place to watch the football game.
And it gave me an opportunity to intermingle with the Regents and get to know them a little better.
They were mostly avid football fans.
They enjoyed an Aggie win and they'd hoop and holler in there when the Aggies would do well.
During your Commandant days, what did you worry about?
What were your worries during the game?
Did you have to worry about something that might?
Well, always were a little concerned about confrontations that might come along, you know, before or after the game.
in the stands somewhere.
Not so much here, but other places seem to be more likely.
But I guess perhaps we didn't worry enough or plan well enough because it was after the Texas game here in 95 that we had the big confrontation on the field after the game and that was nasty.
Nasty.
And A&M had lost the game and we
been beating Texas fairly regularly over recent years but we lost that game and the Texas folks were so happy and jubilant that they poured out of the stands onto the field and waving their flags and celebrating and the Aggies didn't take too kindly to that and
It ended up in confrontations amongst students down there on the field.
A lot of cadets.
The freshmen were down there.
They thought they were gonna carry the yellow leaders off, but it didn't work out that way.
But a lot of them were down there.
So it was a lot of people on the field and a lot of scuffling and carrying on.
All right, after the game is over,
Were you able to go home or did you have a task afterward?
I don't remember anything particular that night, but again, John Coleson, since he left, Malan has hosted a post-game, a little social at his quarters here on campus and invited a lot of friends and people to come by after the game.
Okay.
We did that some, but that's, you know, we'd had a long day and usually any football weekend is a long Saturday.
And see, the average off-campus person has no idea
like I used to tell people, I was so grateful for there to be out-of-town games when I was president or chancellor that therefore I could stay home and relax.
All right, for out of, how often did you go to out-of-town games?
I made most of them.
I made most of the games.
And we were still doing court trips?
Yes.
In those?
And I, you didn't actually,
Was there a viewing stand for a court trip?
Yes.
Which towns on the court trips were the best and which were the worst for court trips?
It's hard to say one is best and one is worst.
They were all good and the local A&M clubs normally supported us when we'd go.
We used to Houston when we'd play rice.
Houston, Austin, Fort Worth, Dallas.
Later, we did make a trip or two to San Antonio on special bowl games and all.
But the four big cities were the normal court trips.
We'd do two a year.
And the local A&M club would get the parade permit for us and insurance, which cost some money.
And we'd have an area marked off.
And they'd provide some kind of a trailer or platform for reviewing stand.
And they were kind of the host for this thing.
Sometimes they would invite a local figure or someone to be the reviewing officer, but a lot of times it ended up me, which is fine.
I enjoyed doing that.
But it was nice to have these folks from that area on the review stand, and the Corps marching down the street always seemed to drag up a pretty big crowd, sometimes bigger than others.
But...
And the cadets would all come to this, pretty much all of them.
It was pretty much a requirement that you show up for the court trip.
And the outfit had to try to help arrange transportation among the students.
But one thing I learned that disappointed me, a lot of times the students, the cadets, wouldn't stay for the ball game.
They'd go to the parade.
But when I checked into that, and that didn't seem to jive with what I remembered as a student.
We went to the games.
The core supporting the team was a big deal in my time.
And now I note that students may or may not stay for a ball game after the quarter.
Most of them don't.
But there's some other factors too.
The cost of a ticket.
Getting a ticket in the visiting city is not so easy.
To go to Austin.
to sit over in the high corner, be ridiculed and thrown beer bottles and other things at you, and the cost of the tickets and all, it's pretty significant.
So there's some other factors today, I think.
But students will go to that,
court trip and they'll they'll make a good show and the crowd seemed to enjoy it and it's an opportunity to socialize some on the review stand and sometimes we'd have a reception or brunch or something before the game at one of the hotels or something but those were good times for the Corps and cadets they enjoyed them all right then I guess another event related to all this is bonfire
How had Bonfire changed, if any, during your 30-year absence?
Well, it had gotten much bigger, humongous, in fact.
Nothing like I remember.
The time to build it had lengthened the way out.
I remember when I came here, we rode the bus out to Lubbock to the Texas Tech game, which was the fourth game of the season, I believe, late September or 1st of October, about that period.
But I remember riding back on the bus one of those trips and looking out there, and they'd stacked all these logs that weekend out on the...
on the bonfire site, you know, they'd already been out and cutting and hauling in logs.
So the bonfire was well underway.
And they kept wanting to move it up a little more, have to get a little earlier start each year.
And there were some press, well, let's don't move it up too much.
But anyway, bonfire had become essentially an entire fall
operation lasted all that time.
And, of course, the height and number of logs and all that much greater.
And when I was here, it was on the drill field.
Then it moved to Duncan Field and then over to the...